### Quick links

**Viewer Tags**

  - [.ve-header](#ve-header)
  - [.ve-image](#ve-image)
  - [.ve-image-grid](#ve-image-grid)

**Howto's**

- [Marking text for interactions](#marking-text)
- [Creating a **zoom to** interaction](#zoom-to)

# Viewer Tags
Custom tags are added to essay text to define viewers that are inserted into the generated page.  Each viewer tag includes a **.ve-** prefix and must appear at the beginning of a new line.  Viewer tag accept one or more positional and/or key-value arguments.  A positional argument is simply a text string that follows the tag.  Some viewers can accept multiple positional arguments, in which case the ordering is important.   Key-value arguments take the form of `<KEY>=<VALUE>`.  The key and understood values are defined for each key.  Key-value arguments must follow any positional arguments used.  For both positional and key-value arguments a value with a space must be enclosed in quotes.  

## .ve-header {id=ve-header}

The `.ve-header` tag is used to define a header that appears at the start of the essay.  The header can be used to:

- Define a title and subtitle for the essay
- Display a banner image
- Create a navigation menu for linking to sections within the current essay, other essays, or arbitrary web pages

As with the images displayed by the `.ve-image` tag, the banner image used by the '.ve-header` tag is a IIIF image and can be cropped or otherwise manipulated when displayed in the header.

- **src**: 
- **options**: 
- **position**: 
- **sticky**: 

## .ve-image {id=ve-image}

The `.ve-image` tag is the most commonly used essay tag.  The tag creates an IIIF image viewer that is able to display one or more images.

- **src**:  The URL to the IIIF manifest for the image to display in the viewer.  This attribute can be omitted when multiple using the viewer in multi-image mode.  
- **options**:  The `options` attribute is used to define the [IIIF image request parameters](https://iiif.io/api/image/2.1/#image-request-parameters) for an image.  This attribute is most commonly used to define a coordinates for displaying an image region.    
- **fit**:  The `fit` attribute controls the display of an image in the viewer viewport.  In the default mode (`contain`) the entire image is show with letter-boxing applied to the top and bottom or left and right when the image aspect ratio differs from the viewers.  When the value `cover` is used the entire viewport is filled and the image display is cropped as needed to fit.
- **compare**:  The `compare` attribute is used in multi-image mode to compare 2 or 3 images.  The compare attribute accepts two possible values, `curtain` and `sync`, defining the comparison mode used.  In `curtain` mode the images are stacked on top of each other and cursor movements over the image will reveal or hide relevant sections of each image in the stack.  In `sync` mode the images to compare are displayed side-by-side with zoom and panning actions applied to each simultaneously.

### Manifest URLs

The manifest URL is a URL to an IIIF presentation manifest that is compliant to version 2.x or version 3.0 of the IIIF Presentation Standard.

When referring to a manifest automatically generated by visual-essays.net a short-form version of the auto-generated URL may be used.  The short-form version takes the form of `<SOURCE>:<SOURCE_ID>`, where `<SOURCE>` is the a site code for one of the image hosting sites supporting manifest generation by visual-essays.net.  The `<SOURCE_ID>` value is a unique resource ID applicable to the site.  For example, visual-essays.net is able to automatically generate IIIF manifests for images hosted on [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Main_Page).  A full auto-generated manifest for the image at [https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sunflower.jpg](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sunflower.jpg){target=_blank} would be [https://iiif.visual-essays.net/wc:Sunflow.jpg/manifest.json](https://iiif.visual-essays.net/wc:Sunflow.jpg/manifest.json).  The short form version of this URL (**wc:Sunflower.jpg**) can be used with any visual-essay.net tag (.ve-image, .ve-header, .ve-image-grid, and others) that accept IIIF manifest attributes.

### Examples

```
.ve-image wc:Sunflower.jpg
```

```
.ve-image jstor:community.24604882
```

```
.ve-image https://iiif.harvardartmuseums.org/manifests/object/299843
```

## .ve-image-grid {id=ve-image-grid}

TODO

# How To's

## Marking Text {id=marking-text}

TODO

## Zoom To {id=zoom-to}

TODO
